# 1

* date:3.11.2024

拓扑基:

称集合 $X$ 上的一个子集族$\mathscr{B}$为$X$上的一个拓扑基，如果$\mathscr{B}$是 $X$上的一个拓扑. 称子集族$\mathscr{B}$为拓扑空间的拓扑基,若$\bar{\mathscr{B\}}=\tau$

Remark: 注意集合的拓扑集和拓扑空间的拓扑基的区别

Prop 1.11. $\mathscr{B}$ 是集合 $X$ 上的一个拓扑基的充要条件为

1. $\cup\_{B\in\mathscr{B\}}B=X$
2. 对于任意的 $B\_1,B\_2\in\mathscr{B}$ 和任意的 $x\in B\_1\cap B\_2$，存在 $B\_3\in\mathscr{B}$ 使得 $x\in B\_3\subseteq B\_1\cap B\_2$

Prop 1.12.$\mathscr{B}$ 是拓扑空间 $(X,\tau)$ 上的一个拓扑基的充要条件为

1. $\mathscr{B}\subseteq\tau$
2. $\tau \subseteq \bar{\mathscr{B\}}$

也就是 $\mathscr{B}$ 是 $\tau$ 的一个子集，且每个开集都是 $\mathscr{B}$ 中一些成员的并集.

Eg 3. $R$ 的子集族 $\mathscr{B} = { (a,b) | a\<b, a,b\in Q }$ 是 $E^1$ 上的一个拓扑基.

Considering $E^1={U | U$ 是若干开区间的并 $}$

Predict $\mathscr{B}$ is a base of topology space $X$, then $x\in A \sub X$, which means $A$ is a neighbourhood of $x$ $\leftrightarrow$ $\exists B \in \mathscr{B}$, s.t. $x\in B \sub A$

Therefore, we can use this prop to show:

$x$ is a accuulation point of $A$ $\leftrightarrow$ $\forall B \in \mathscr{B}, x\in B$, we have $B\cap A\backslash\{{x\}} \neq \emptyset$

$x\in \bar{A}$ $\leftrightarrow$ $\forall B \in \mathscr{B}, x\in B$, we have $B\cap A \neq \emptyset$

$f:X\to Y$ is continuous $\leftrightarrow$ $\forall B\in \mathscr{B}$, we have $f^{-1}(B)$ is an open set of $Y$

### Chapter 2. Several important topological properties

分离性 (separation)

可数性 (countability)

紧性 (compactness)

连通性 (connectedness)

#### 2.1 分离公理与可数公理

_Separation Axioms and Countability Axioms_

**2.1.1 $T\_1$ Axiom and $T\_2$ Axiom**

$T\_1$ Axiom: $\forall x,y\in X$, if $x\neq y$, then $\exists U,V$ is a neighbourhood of $x,y$, s.t. $x\in U, y\in V$, and $x\notin V, y\notin U$

$T\_2$ Axiom: $\forall x,y\in X$, if $x\neq y$, then $\exists U,V$ is a neighbourhood of $x,y$, s.t. $x\in U, y\in V$, and $U\cap V = \varnothing$

任意两个不同点都有不相交的邻域

We can notice that $T\_2$ Axiom $\Rightarrow$ $T\_1$ Axiom

Remark. We can change neighbourhood to open neighbourhood, and then we can get the same result.

Prop 2.1. $X fits the $T\_1$ Axiom $\leftrightarrow \forall x\in X, {x}$ is a closed set.

Proof.

$\Rightarrow$

We only need to show that single point set is a closed set.

Let $x\in X$, then $ forall y \neq x$, we have $x\in U, y\in V$, and $x\notin V, y\notin U$

Then $\bar\{{x\}}={x}$, which means ${x}$ is a closed set.

$\Leftarrow$

Predict $x\neq y$, since $y$ is a closed set, then $X\backslash{y}$ is an open neighbourhood of $x$, and $X\backslash{x}$ is an open neighbourhood of $y$, and $X\backslash{y}\cap X\backslash{x} = \varnothing$

Therefore, $X$ fits the $T\_1$ Axiom. $\blacksquare$

Prop 2.2. in Hausdorff space(which fits the $T\_2$ Axiom), every sequence has at most one limit.

Proof.

Predict ${x\_n}$ has a limit of $x\_0$, predict ${x\_n} \not\to x\neq x\_0$

Choocse $U,V$ is a neighbourhood of $x\_0,x$, s.t. $x\_0\in U, x\in V$, and $U\cap V = \varnothing$

Therefore $V$ has at most limited points of ${x\_n}$, and $U$ has at most limited points of ${x\_n}$, which means ${x\_n}$ has at most one limit. $\blacksquare$

**2.1.2 $T\_3$ Axiom and $T\_4$ Axiom**

$T\_3$ Axiom: $\forall x\in X, A\sub X,\~A$ closed, if $x\notin A$, then $\exists U,V$ is a neighbourhood of $x,A$, s.t. $x\in U, A\sub V$, and $U\cap V = \varnothing$

$T\_4$ Axiom: $\forall A,B\sub X$, if $A\cap B = \varnothing$, then $\exists U,V$ is a neighbourhood of $A,B$, s.t. $A\sub U, B\sub V$, and $U\cap V = \varnothing$

Remark. $T\_4$ Axiom cannot derive $T\_3$ Axiom, and $T\_3$ Axiom cannot derive $T\_4$ Axiom.

Moreover, from $T\_1,T\_4$ Axiom, we can derive $T\_2,T\_3$ Axiom. We can pick $(R,\tau)(\tau)={(-\infty,a)|a\in \[-\infty,+\infty]}$, then $R$ fits the $T\_4$ Axiom, but not fits the $T\_1,T\_2,T\_3$ Axiom.

Prop 2.3. A metric space fits the $T\_i$ Axiom, $i=1,2,3,4$

Proof.

1. $T\_1,T\_2$ Axiom: $\forall x\neq y$, we can choose $U=B(x,\frac{1}{2}d(x,y)), V=B(y,\frac{1}{2}d(x,y))$, then $x\in U, y\in V$, and $U\cap V = \varnothing$
2. $T\_4$ Axiom: $\forall A,B\sub X$, def $d(x,A)=\inf {d(x,a)|a\in A}$, then we choose $f(x)=\dfrac{d(x,A)}{d(x,A)+d(x,B)}$, Therefor $\forall t \in (0,1)$, we have $f^{-1}((-\infty,t))$, $f^{-1}((t,+\infty))$ are open sets, and $f^{-1}((-\infty,t))\cap f^{-1}((t,+\infty)) = \varnothing$

Prop 2.4.

1. $T\_3$ Axiom $\Leftrightarrow \forall x\in X, W$ is an open neighbourhood of $x$, then $\exists V$ is an open neighbourhood of $x$, s.t. $\bar{V}\sub W$
2. $T\_4$ Axiom $\Leftrightarrow \forall A$ closed, $W$ is an open neighbourhood of $A$, then $\exists U$ is an open neighbourhood of $A$, s.t. $\bar{U}\sub W$

Proof.

We only proof the second one as they have similar proof.

* $\Leftarrow$ predict $A,B$ closed, $A\cap B = \varnothing$, Then $B^C$ is an open neighbourhood of $A$. Therefore exists $U$ is an open neighbourhood of $A$, $\bar{U}\sub B^C$, let's choose $V = (\bar{U})^C$, then $V$ is open, and $A\sub U, B\sub V$, and $U\cap V = \varnothing$
* $\Rightarrow$ predict $B=W^C$, then $A$, $B$ closed, and $A\cap B = \varnothing$, from $T\_4$ Axiom, there exists U,V is an open neighbourhood of A,B, s.t. $A\sub U, B\sub V$, and $U\cap V = \varnothing$, therefore $U$ is what we need. $\blacksquare$

**2.1.3 Countability Axiom**

We have $C\_1$ Axiom, $C\_2$ Axiom, and we have $C\_i$ space which fits the $C\_i$ Axiom.

In order to define $C\_1$ Axiom, we need to define some new concepts.

Def 2.1. $x\in X$ ,we call $\mathscr{N}(x)={A| A$ is a neighboorhood of $x}$ is a neighbourhood system of $x$.

We call $\mathscr{U}\sub \mathscr{N}(x)$ as a base of neighbourhood system of $x$.

**$C\_1$ Axiom** Any point $x\in X$ has a countable base of neighbourhood system.

Remark. We can see a metric space fits the $C\_1$ Axiom.

Prop 2.5.
